---
label: III
title: Naturalism in Ethics
subtitle: Hume and Mill
layout: essay
order: 50
---

In ethics, naturalism refers to the belief that moral values and duties can be derived from the natural world, without reference to supernatural or transcendent sources, such as God. Hume and Mill both advance naturalism in their ethical theories, arguing that moral truths are based on the scope of emotions we experience in our lives. As such, they focus their discussion of ethics on their observations of nature, rather than their metaphysical beliefs. Although both Hume and Mill rely on naturalistic observations to develop their ethical theories, Hume is generally seen as an anti-realist or noncognitivist, while Mill is more commonly considered a realist. In this essay, we will discuss Hume and Mill’s naturalist ethical theories, evaluating their respective accounts of normativity and the system of rewards and sanctions their theories presuppose.

To understand Hume’s ethical theory, we must first examine his core belief against the existence of abstract ideas. Hume was an empiricist; he believed that all ideas are derived from experience and, as such, denied the existence of innate ideas. According to Hume, our minds receive impressions from internal or external sensations, then make a copy of the impression to form an idea. For example, if I struck the middle C on the piano (i.e., receive an impression) enough times, I would begin to assign the sound the piano makes to an idea of middle C. Now, imagine a generic piano note. Most likely, you recalled the sound of a certain note or pictured a symbol. No matter how hard you try to think of a generic piano note, you will always think of a particular note. As such, Hume concludes that we cannot have abstract ideas and establishes the presence of subjectivity in human knowledge. 

Here, an issue arises with Hume’s theory of knowledge. If everyone has subjective ideas, how can we explain human communication? Hume argues that “we let a particular idea be [the] paradigm,” then gather similar ideas to identify a classification. As we compare our findings, we discover more and more correlations in our observations until we come to a common understanding of an idea. For Hume, our understanding of moral goodness comes about similarly. When we experience a “feeling of moral approbation” or a “sentiment for humanity,” an idea of good is generated. Because a variety of situations would elicit such feelings (of pleasure), these impressions build on each other, eventually equipping us with a collection of virtues that we designate as “the good.” Thus, Hume establishes sentiments as the primary object of moral evaluation, expressing moral judgments as a feeling rather than a belief.

Because of his sentimentalist account of morality, Hume is often considered an anti-realist in ethics. Moral anti-realism asserts that there are no objective moral values, only subjective moral evaluations. In An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, Hume states that morality “is entirely relative to the sentiment or mental taste of each particular being,” echoing his argument against the existence of abstract ideas.[^1] If we consider Hume an anti-realist, we could argue that there are no objective moral truths, only feelings that we project onto situations. These projections of morality may feel true, but they are not real. 

Others argue that Hume is not only an anti-realist, but also a noncognitivist. Because his moral theory derives from feelings, not reason, we could infer that Hume believes that moral propositions can be neither true nor false. In A Treatise of Human Nature, Hume raises three main objections against reason as the foundation of moral evaluation, which are based on logical, grammatical, and ontological considerations. First, he contends that “ought” and “ought not” expresses a relation that is distinct from “is” and “is not.” If we were to derive an “ought” (which is normative) from an “is” (which is descriptive), our conclusion would not be logically sound. Next, Hume points out that an “ought” statement is essentially an imperative, where we command B to do A (i.e., B: Do A). Imperatives cannot be true or false, so an “is” statement cannot follow from an “ought” statement. Finally, if all ideas come from sensory experiences and we cannot have sensory experiences of abstract objects, we cannot have sensory experiences of moral obligations as an abstract concept. Thus, moral judgments must be validated by feelings, which present propositions that are neither true nor false, making Hume a noncognitivist.

Here, another issue in Hume’s account of normativity arises. If actions that arouse “a sentiment for humanity” lead to pleasant feelings of moral approbation, how can we explain the actions of people who derive pleasure from the pain of others? Consider the case of Agatha and Quintain. Quintain was a magistrate who became obsessed with Agatha, a young woman who had already devoted herself to God. After she refused his advances, Quintain tortured Agatha, who stayed true to her faith until her last moment. If it is in human nature to be empathetic, how can we explain Quintain’s actions? Hume would argue that Quintain’s sentiment for humanity was destroyed by his society, which was one of the most corrupt systems in history. Because moral goodness is a secondary quality that derives from the primary quality of someone’s character, Quintain’s extreme arrogance and egotism drove him to derive perverse pleasure from the pain of others. As such, his disposition is not reflective of humanity as a whole, but of bad institutions. 

Though Hume’s ethics emphasizes the role of sentiments in shaping moral evaluations, his theory presupposes an external system of rewards and sanctions as a necessary condition for normativity, as demonstrated by the case of Agatha and Quintain. This dichotomy is exemplified by the distinction he makes between moral virtues, namely natural and artificial virtues. Hume argued that natural virtues (e.g., courage, benevolence, and generosity) are innate and arise with the natural tendency of humans to socialize and empathize with others. In our original state, we form bonds through sexual attraction and love for our offspring, where it is natural to put our families before ourselves. As the nuclear family becomes extended through clans and tribes, families become distant and our natural virtues become vulnerable to the influence of societal pressures. Thus, social institutions must cultivate artificial virtues, such as justice and promise-keeping, to counteract these negative influences. Though artificial virtues are not as genuine as natural virtues, Hume believes they are just as necessary for promoting social order and stability.

It is important to note that Hume did not believe all pleasures signaled virtue, but only those evoked when taking a “general, disinterested point of view.” Hume recognized that people often have self-interested motives for engaging in virtuous behavior. For example, a baker might give away free samples of their bread to gain more customers and increase their profits, rather than out of a genuine desire to be generous. This distinction is fundamental for Hume’s account of normativity. For Hume, to act virtuously is to look past our own interests and consider the overall well-being of those affected by our actions, cultivating both natural and artificial virtues.

Although Mill is also a naturalist, he approaches the question of ethics from a utilitarian perspective, where “actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness; wrong as they tend to produce the reverse.”[^2] This proposition is based on Bentham’s proof for the principle of utility, which argues that the ultimate goal of human action is to achieve pleasure and avoid pain. For Bentham, pleasure and pain are the best predictors of human behavior, and therefore, actions should be evaluated on their ability to maximize pleasure and minimize pain for the largest number of people. Mill builds on this idea, arguing that the quality of pleasure is just as important as the quantity of pleasure, and that some pleasures are inherently superior to others. We will revisit this idea of “elevated” pleasures later.

Though the feelings of pleasure and pain are integral to Mill’s ethical theory, his conception of preference utilitarianism acts as a proponent of moral realism, expressing moral values as objective truths. Unlike Hume, Mill believed that pleasure and pain could be measured and compared across individuals through empirical observation and rational analysis. Imagine I walk up to a toddler and steal their candy. While I might derive some short-term pleasure from the candy, my actions would likely cause greater unhappiness for the toddler and their parents (who will now have to deal with a tantrum). Because my actions did not promote the overall happiness of all actors involved, stealing is morally wrong in this situation. Now, imagine my mother is severely ill and in need of medication we cannot afford. If I steal from CVS to save her life, then stealing would be justified because it promotes the greatest overall happiness. In both situations, utilitarianism helped us identify whether our moral judgments were true or false, presenting objective normative guidelines for behavior. 

Hume struggled to create a convincing explanation for the existence of evil in his ethics, and Mill’s realist account of normativity resolves this issue. For Mill, the rightness of acts is not determined by the motives of the person performing them, but the overall happiness the action contributes to society.As such, evil derives from repeated disregard for the happiness of others in favor of one’s self-interest. If we return to our example of Agatha and Quintain, we could argue that Quintain is universally acknowledged as an evil person because his actions caused a net loss of happiness in his society, not because his character was corrupted by bad institutions. Thus, Mill’s theory presents a more sophisticated version of naturalism in ethics that is more universally applicable.

Having established that moral truths are learned through empirical observations of the world, Mill concludes that the most virtuous pursuit for humans is to cultivate their intellectual endeavors, which he calls “elevated” pleasures. This idea is key to Mill’s account of normativity, expressing a different perspective on the nature of human flourishing than the traditional emphasis on developing moral character. He argues that those capable of “elevated” pleasures, namely reason, imagination, and moral sentiments, would prefer them to cruder pleasures, such as eating and drinking. When you become capable of these “elevated” pleasures, you unlock a new level of happiness, so to speak, where society as a whole benefits exponentially. As such, Mill’s theory observes that human beings are inherently curious, which is why we tend to feel a stronger sense of satisfaction when we engage in activities that broaden our knowledge of the world, as opposed to pursuing superficial pleasures. In the words of Mill, “it is better to be a human being dissatisfied than a pig satisfied; better to be Socrates dissatisfied than a fool satisfied.”[^3]

Though Mill acknowledges that societal rewards and sanctions play a role in shaping our desires, his account of ethics challenges the assumption that normativity is guided by social institutions. Instead, Mill argues that normativity comes from one’s consciousness of their worth and place in society, where our capacity to bear our own scrutiny allows us to reflect and change actions that were mistaken or misguided. This capacity is a crucial part of being a free and autonomous individual. As we reflect on our actions and form desires that are unique to us, then we are “said to have character.” Moreover, because Mill believes a desire for happiness and aversion to pain are inherent in human nature, they do not need to be imposed externally. Instead, he advises parents to educate their own children, helping them internalize these desires and making them the basis for moral decision-making. Mill argued that an overly centralized or despotic government can infringe on the individual liberties of the population; thus, we have a responsibility to others to cultivate the common good and prevent external forces from displacing our individual pursuits for “elevated” pleasures. 

Thus far, we have discussed Hume and Mill’s naturalist theories of ethics, reconstructing and comparing their respective accounts of normativity. Hume argued for an anti-realist and noncognitivist view of morality, where a “sentiment for humanity” acts as the normative force that guides our individual conceptions of the good. On the other hand, Mill’s utilitarianism acts as a form of moral realism, where objective moral values can be discovered by observing the amount of happiness an action produces. While Hume and Mill present compelling accounts of normativity, their theories are not without criticism. Considered individually, both philosophers struggle to create convincing explanations for select situations. If reconciled, however, I believe the two theories could give us a more holistic view of moral goodness through naturalism. 

{% backmatter %}

## Notes

[^1]: David Hume, *Hume: Moral Philosophy* (New York: Hackett Publishing, 2006), 473.

[^2]: John Troyer, *The Classical Utilitarians: Bentham and Mill* (New York: Hackett Publishing, 2003), 49.

[^3]: Troyer, *The Classical Utilitarians: Bentham and Mill*, 35.

{% endbackmatter %}
