---
label: II
title: Simplicity Across Time
subtitle: The Ethics of Epicurus, the Stoics, and Spinoza
layout: essay
order: 40
---

Though Epicurus, the Stoics, and Spinoza lived centuries apart, their ethical theories share remarkable similarities, most likely owing to their shared experience living in states that exercised immense authority over individuals. All three schools of moral thought act as extensions of their respective metaphysics and decidedly settle for relatively little, reflecting an overarching concern with the presence of uncertainty and the fragility of life during tumultuous times. In this essay, I will evaluate and compare their ethical theories with respect to moral goodness, pleasure and pain, and social interaction.

To understand Epicurus, the Stoics, and Spinoza’s conceptions of moral goodness, we must first clarify their ontological beliefs. Though Aristotle had a large influence on Epicurus’ philosophy, he rejected Aristotle’s metaphysics, instead returning to ancient atomist thought. The ancient atomists, Leucippus and Democritus, believed that atoms were the basic building blocks of all matter, colliding and congregating to form nature. Epicurus extended this theory to explain rational beliefs, arguing that repeated sensory experiences create anticipations of future experiences. Through repetition, these anticipations become prolepsis, or true generalizations about our existence. Thus, we can conclude that rational beliefs derive from sensory experiences. 

Epicurus uses this intermediate conclusion to evidence his definition of pleasure and pain, which ultimately contributes to his conception of moral goodness. For Epicurus, the good for human beings is pleasure; the evil is pain. To live a good life, a reasonable person must first minimize their sources of physical and psychological pain and then seek pleasure. Using Epicurus’ metaphysics, we can apply this abstract lesson to our daily concerns. Imagine that I am overwhelmingly concerned with the possibility of enduring a tortured after-life, and my fear makes it impossible to indulge in any of my desires. As an Epicurean, you might quote your teacher in saying that death “is nothing to us, since so long as we exist, death is not with us; but when death comes, we do not exist”.[^1] If our rational beliefs come from sensations and we do not have sensations of death, then death is nothing. As such, fearing death is akin to fearing nothing. It is important to note that Epicurus does not mean that things we do not sense do not exist, but rather that they do not exist in our universe. By understanding the nature of reality through this metaphysical framework, we free ourselves from irrational anxieties, which, in turn, allows us to pursue an unburdened life of simple pleasures.

Though Epicurus believed the good for human beings is the sensation of pleasure, he did not mean this in a hedonistic sense. Epicurus observed three distinctions of pleasure: vain desires, natural but unnecessary desires, and natural and necessary desires. If we indulge carelessly in any of these desires, pain begins to accompany pleasure, which must be avoided. For example, if I am hungry, eating a meal will satisfy my hunger and bring me pleasure. However, if I continue to eat once I am full, I will experience a stomachache or a tough hour in the restroom. Just as some people need to eat more or less to feel full, the point of over or under-indulgence is different for everybody. Thus, Epicurus argues that we must habitually reflect on the moment at which our body experiences an equilibrium of the atoms (e.g., the satisfaction of my hunger), which gives us an individual understanding of pleasure.

In his analysis, Epicurus observed that vain desires and natural but unnecessary desires often brought more pain than pleasure, even in moderation. He urged others to avoid them and settle for simple lives with only natural and necessary desires. As such, Epicurus limited his social interaction with others, as he felt that the pain of anxiety was best avoided by limiting engagement with strangers. Luckily, he inherited a small villa from his parents (i.e., the “garden”), where he invited individuals with similar outlooks on life to live with him. They avoided any situations that could cause discomfort, even simple games and sports. Although Epicurus acted as a leader of sorts at his “garden,” he advocated for friendship among his guests as equals, where men and women were treated with equal merit. Through the friendship of equals, the two individuals supplement each other’s skills, generating both utility and pleasure. For Epicurus, marriage worked similarly, but he was careful to note the anxieties inherent in such unions, such as having children. If a couple could avoid contentious arguments by not having children, why should we force them to have children? 

Simplicity is what makes Epicurean morality so compelling, but it is also the reason why it falls short of being wholly convincing. Because Epicurus relies heavily on the nature of pleasure and pain in constructing his ethical theory, the moral relativism inherent in his ideas provide little guidance for society as a whole, making it difficult to apply his teachings in a consistent way. In the same vein, Epicurus’ narrow conception of pleasure ignores the joy some individuals take in leading complex lives with a variety of experiences, prescribing passivity as the only treatment for discomfort. Without opening ourselves up to the risk of pain, how can we expect to understand the depth of pleasure? For what is pleasure without pain?

The Stoics undertake these questions from a different perspective, advocating for an ethical approach that relies on the acceptance of both pleasure and pain, rather than the strategic avoidance of pain and unnecessary desires. Like Epicurus, the Stoics derived their conception of moral goodness from their ontological beliefs, which developed through three periods of Stoic thought. Following Plato and Aristotle, Zeno of Citium founded Stoicism upon teleological principles, wherein we understand the universe by sorting the purposes things serve. Zeno and other early Stoics were opposed to Plato’s theory of forms, but affirmed his theory of temporal, spatial, and physical relations and underlying belief of determinism. 

The middle Stoics, most notably Cicero and Seneca, supported a different set of metaphysics. Cicero believed that God acts as the architect of the world, existing remotely and governing with complete freedom. As such, the good for humans is to live in accordance with God’s divine order, pursuing virtue above all else. For Cicero, virtue was made up of four cardinal virtues: wisdom, justice, magnanimity, and moderation. These four virtues guide our actions in polite society, helping us maintain civility and courtesy as well as friendships. In a way, Cicero argued against Epicurean isolationism, instead advocating for the acceptance of maintaining society with others as part of life. Seneca expanded on this idea, further emphasizing acceptance of pain as “an ineliminable part of life” and resignation to adversity as the pinnacle of moral action. Rather than avoidance, as suggested by Epicurus, Seneca faced discomfort head-on, further reinforcing the importance of self-control for Stoicism. 

Throughout the centuries, the early and middle Stoics developed a clear theoretical framework for Stoicism, consisting of three primary beliefs. (1) All things have a predetermined purpose and order. (2)  Pain and pleasure should be treated indifferently and accepted as a natural part of life. (3) Maintaining order and stability by participating courteously in polite society is essential to living a virtuous and good life. 

The later Stoics were primarily concerned with the application of Stoicism and supplemented this theoretical framework with practical advice to demonstrate how Stoicism could be applied universally. Of the later Stoics, Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius were of particular importance. They lived during Rome’s complete domination of the Mediterranean at opposite ends of the social hierarchy; Epictetus was a Phrygian slave and Aurelius was a Roman emperor and general. Both men served to contextualize Stoicism and how it could bring moral stability to anyone, regardless of their level of material control. 

In the Enchiridion, Epictetus makes a distinction between internal and external goods, endeavoring to explain why pain and pleasure should be treated indifferently. Epictetus defined internal goods as things within our power (i.e., our minds) and external goods as things beyond our power (i.e., our bodies, property, reputation). When we form attachments to external goods (which I believe is analogous to Epicurus’ definition of vain and natural but unnecessary desires), we stake our happiness upon that which we cannot control. In doing so, we place immense value on things that we will inevitably lose. Thus, by seeking pleasure in our lives in things beyond our power, we bear the burden of consistently anticipating pain. 

Here, Epictetus pivots away from Epicurean tradition. Since we already know everything external is out of our control, there is no point in avoiding pain by isolating ourselves. Regardless of where they are, our loved ones are bound to die eventually. What will make the difference is how we learn to cope with natural losses, not trying to avoid them altogether. According to Epictetus, we must “demand not that events should happen as you wish: but wish them to happen as they do happen, and you will go on well.” Once we make peace with our lack of control over external goods, we can refocus our energy into our internal goods. Epictetus notes that as a human, “nothing is more authoritative than your power of moral choice” because “it itself is free and independent.”[^2] In other words, the internal good of humans is our capacity to act virtuously; thus, we have genuine moral obligations to attend faithfully to our duties.

How, then, should we define our individual duties? Epictetus prioritizes natural relations, most importantly, familial ties. Consider the relationship you have with your parents. When you are little, your parents take care of you, feeding, clothing, and educating you into adulthood. Epictetus says that in the same way, we have a genuine moral obligation to our parents, taking care of them as they get older. Whether someone is a good or bad parent bears no importance on familial obligation; your parents are still your parents. Aurelius builds on this idea, stating that to live virtuously is to live in harmony with nature. It is in our nature to love and forgive even those who have done wrong, which is what makes us humans before we are individuals. Thus, exhibiting social grace is a natural obligation of being human, a sentiment echoed by Cicero’s earlier writing. As such, the Stoic rule for social interaction can be summarized as follows: Humans are naturally interconnected; thus, to serve the common good is to serve our own good.

Although Stoicism presents a consistent method for living a good life, it raises questions about the sustainability of committing to extensive self-control. In the wake of a significant loss in the family, you would not encourage someone to suppress their emotions and simply accept the loss. In most cases, those who do not grieve openly find other ways to cope, which are often more detrimental to one’s physical and mental health. Humans have both sense and sensibility; if you try to suppress one side of human nature, the other is likely to become unbalanced. As such, overemphasizing reason results in feelings of apathy towards the world around you. How can you treat others with kindness and empathy if you view your own pleasure and pain indifferently? 

In response to the shortcomings of Epicureanism and Stoicism, Spinoza combines aspects of both theories in his conception of ethics, creating a hybrid approach contextualized by his epistemological beliefs. According to Spinoza, our mental and bodily states are “different sides of the same spoon,” or two aspects of the same substance, acting as the finite correspondents to “the face of the universe” and “the order of thought.” As such, our thoughts and our bodies are just different ways to experience the same things, so our ideas should be a reflection of the way things really are. He rejects the notion that our perceptions are purely subjective or constructed solely from experiences, instead suggesting that an objective reality exists. 

Here, Spinoza creates a distinction between adequate ideas and true ideas. Spinoza states that adequate ideas are ideas that have “all the intrinsic marks of a true idea” when considered in and of itself, without its bodily correlate. As Spinoza meditates on the nature of adequate ideas, he draws two intermediate conclusions. (1) Because our ideas are intimately connected with our physical sensations, we cannot know ourselves apart from our embodied experience. (2) Our minds have knowledge about our bodies, but this knowledge is incomplete. For example, we know our lungs help us breathe, but we do not have an adequate understanding of its complexities and how they came to be. Thus, Spinoza concludes that we only have inadequate ideas ourselves, which means we have no true knowledge of the world.

If we have no true understanding of the world, how are we to define our existence and the good for humans? Spinoza would respond that “all ideas, insofar as they are referred to God are true.”[^3] The conception of finite things necessitates understanding of other things, while infinite things can be conceived in and of themselves. Since we have finite minds, we can only conceive of a finite amount of things. God, however, is infinite, so our idea of God is essentially complete. If an infinite substance encompasses all of existence and God is infinite, then God encompasses human existence. Once we identify our relation to God, our only true idea, we can begin to create adequate ideas about our existence. 

Spinoza is an egoist, meaning he believes that actions that are morally correct and praiseworthy must be in our own self-interest. He observes that all things exist to preserve themselves; thus, our power corresponds to our success in maintaining ourselves. According to Spinoza, things that increase our power bring us pleasure, and things that undermine our power brings us pain. When we have more adequate ideas about the universe, we gain a firmer grasp on the causal relations of the world, which, in turn, means we will have more success navigating uncertainty and avoiding pain. Like Epicurus, Spinoza believed that avoiding pain and seeking pleasure was key to living a good life. For Spinoza, however, pleasure was not the ultimate goal, but rather a byproduct of seeking a deep understanding of the world around us through reason.

Though Spinoza recognized the importance of seeking pleasure for humans, we must be careful not to overstate the role of pleasure in Spinoza’s ethics. Like the Stoics, Spinoza understood that an uninformed pursuit of pleasure could cause one more harm than good. However, Spinoza does not create a strict dichotomy between reason and emotion like the Stoics; he argues that reliance on pleasure and pain only becomes harmful if they are not based on an adequate idea of reality. For example, it may normally bring me pleasure to go on a morning run, but if my ankle is hurting, it would not be a good idea to go on my run without regard to my physical condition. On the flip side, I should not denounce running altogether just because my ankle is currently hurting. As such, Spinoza reconciles the Epicurean emphasis of pleasure with the Stoic insistence of reason, creating a more balanced conception of the good for humans.

Though Spinoza is an egoist, he does not believe that we should prioritize self-interest before that of all others. Rather, Spinoza argues that our own interests are “best promoted by living cooperatively with others” (Dreher, “Spinoza’s Psychological and Ethical Thought” 2). Because we take pleasure in what is useful to us, a wise person recognizes that humans can only enjoy certain protections by participating cooperatively in society. Simply put, Spinoza advocates for a commonsense approach toward social interaction, where we stay out of trouble and make ourselves agreeable to others. Though it may seem easy to discount Spinoza’s ethics because of his emphasis on an intellectual love of God, many of his lessons are still applicable in the modern day. Using Spinoza’s ethical framework, we can see ourselves for what we really are, “part of an inconceivably large whole,” which puts our lives into perspective and helps us forgive the minor indiscretions of others. As such, we are able to find peace in ourselves through an acceptance of the world around us, including those who inhabit the world with us.

Thus far, we have evaluated three different ethical approaches with regard to morality, pleasure and pain, and social interaction, which share a common emphasis on reason as the key to achieving moral justice. Despite their different views on social interaction, all three schools of thought advocate for treating others with kindness and respect, likely reflecting the tumultuous times they lived through. The underlying simplicity in Epicureanism and Stoicism helped form the foundation of Egoism, which addresses the shortcomings of both theories in one lucid argument, imparting lessons that are still applicable today. 

{% backmatter %}

## Notes

[^1]: Brad Inwood and Lloyd P. Gerson, *The Epicurean Reader* (New York: Hachette Publishing, 1994), 28.

[^2]: Brad Inwood and Llyod P. Gerson, *The Stoics Reader* (New York: Hachette Publishing, 2008), 200.

[^3]: Baruch Spinoza, *Ethics, Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect and Selected Letters*, trans. Samuel Shirley (New York: Hackett Publishing, 1982), 235.

{% endbackmatter %}
