---
label: IV
title: Kant and His Critics
subtitle: In Defense of Moral Realism
layout: essay
order: 60
---

In his ethics, Immanuel Kant was a staunch defender of moral realism and normativity (arguably to a fault). He believed a “real” distinction exists between good and evil, meaning the fact an act is evil should be the main justification against it. Kant’s moral philosophy laid the moral groundwork for modern deontological ethics, influencing other notable philosophers, such as Chrstine Korsgaard. Despite the influence his ethics exert, Kant’s moral theory is not without its fair share of critics, most notably G.W.F. Hegel and Friedrich Nietzsche. In this essay, we will reconstruct Kant’s ethical theory, evaluating his arguments against the criticisms of Hegel and Nietzsche. 

To understand Kant’s defense of moral realism, we must first examine two moral distinctions. First, the well-being or bad for humans refers to what is agreeable to us (i.e., relating to pleasure and pain). Because this moral distinction deals with our emotions, Kant argues that theories that emphasize the well-being or bad for humans are subjective. On the other hand, the good and evil refers to how the will uses “the law of reason to make something its object.”[^1] In other words, whether an action is morally good or evil depends on our ability to practice the law of reason, which Kant calls the Categorical Imperative. Because good and evil deal with our faculty for reason, Kant argues that they are subjective, making them a more reliable basis for defining moral rules. Under these presuppositions, Kant constructs a moral realist conception of ethics, where moral principles are grounded on reason and apply universally to all rational beings.

According to Kant, three principles guide our understanding of morality. (1) An action is considered good in and of itself if done from a sense of duty, and (2) such actions derive their moral worth from its underlying maxim, not its purpose. Following (1) and (2), we can conclude that (3) acting out of duty is to recognize the moral law as an inherent obligation. Thus, moral duty is not determined by personal preferences or desires, but rather by objective moral laws. From these principles, Kant creates three distinctions among actions done for a purpose, rather than out of duty. The first category includes actions that are clearly not done from duty, such as eating when you are hungry. Then, there are actions that accord with moral laws, but are done to resist inclinations, not from a sense of duty. Finally, there are actions that are consistent with duty, but which we are naturally inclined to do. For example, someone who is happy would not consider committing suicide. As such, moral evaluations are based on the principles that motivate our will, not the consequences or intentions of one’s actions.

How, then, should we determine which maxims we should follow? An infinite number of “wise sayings” exist in the world; how do we know which maxims motivate morally good actions? For Kant, all ethical maxims must have form, matter, and form-in-matter. Form refers to the classic configuration of the Categorical Imperative, which tells us to “act only so that the maxim of your action can be consistently willed to be a universal law of nature.” For example, if everyone were to act according to the principle of maximin (i.e., acting out of pure self-interest), all of your actions would be undermined by someone else acting in their self-interest. Such principles can only succeed by involving deception, where someone thinks they are not being undermined. Thus, this Categorical Imperative teaches us which principles are not true ethical maxims through exclusion.

In addition to form, all ethical maxims have matter, applying to humans universally by virtue of reason alone. As such, the moral law is essentially a principle of logic. If we return to our previous example, we know maximin does not have form, because it is justified by desire rather than reason. In other words, maximin advocates for treating others as means to our own ends. Since we know that maximin is not a true ethical maxim, the opposite must be true — “treat others as ends; never as means.” Because humans have both sense and sensibility, ethical maxims must reconcile both sides with form-in-matter. Thus, maxims must have ends that all rational beings can desire. With this formula in mind, we begin to develop a system of maxims that construct a morally good society, or social ethic. 

Because Kant’s moral theory presupposes a real distinction between good and evil, it must also presuppose the autonomy of the will to choose between the two. With these three Categorical Imperatives (form, matter, and form-in-matter), Kant explains why humans with autonomous wills would choose to construct societies that embed the moral law in practical legislation. Thus, the strength of Kant’s ethical theory lies in its ability to provide a rational explanation for our duty to treat others with respect and compassion. 

Though Kant’s argument succeeds in establishing the necessity of fulfilling our duty towards others, it is unclear what would motivate humans to choose duty for duty’s sake. If it is rational to do what is good for me, why would we forsake our inclinations to fulfill our duties? Korsgaard's account of practical identity addresses this issue, explaining why it would be in our personal interest to act according to moral obligations. According to Korsgaard, everyone has a practical identity, or “a description under which one values oneself.” Because our practical identity evolves with self-reflection, violating one of the descriptors we have internalized can crack the foundation of our practical identity. Thus, this desire to protect our valued self-perception motivates us to fulfill our obligations. 

Consider the duty we have to care for our parents as they get older. Most people love and appreciate their parents, conceiving of filial duty as a fundamental part of their practical identities. If we do not fulfill our care obligations as our parents age (e.g., accompanying them to health check-ups, paying for medical treatments, etc.), they could pass prematurely. Someone who had always thought of themselves as filial would experience an overwhelming sense of guilt for not fulfilling these obligations, irreparably changing their perception of themselves for the worse. By virtue of being rational creatures, we do not have to experience such loss firsthand to imagine its effects. When we are faced with a decision, we reflect upon possible outcomes, choosing the course of action that would best maintain or improve our practical identity. As such, obligations are “what one cannot accept about oneself” if left unfulfilled.

With his ethical theory in mind, it is important to note that Kant tried to reconcile rationalism and empiricism in his philosophy, arguing for a theory of cognition that involves both intuition and understanding. As such, Kant created a distinction between the phenomenal world, or the world as we perceive it, and the noumenal world, or the world as it truly is, independent of our perceptions. Because the moral law cannot be subject to empirical verification (i.e., we cannot observe an abstract concept in nature), Kant concluded that it must reside in the noumenal world. As such, other abstract concepts in his ethical theory, such as the autonomous will and our capacity for practical reason, must also exist exclusively in the noumenal world. Since the noumenal realm contains reality in and of itself, it presupposes the existence of objective truths, forming the foundation of Kant’s realist moral philosophy. 

Hegel criticizes this aspect of Kant’s moral theory extensively, rejecting the existence of a noumenal world. Kant posited that the noumenal world was governed by a separate set of rules from the phenomenal world, allowing for the existence of abstract and objective truths. These noumenal realities are manifested in the phenomenal world through practical reason, where we observe the moral law at work by understanding the actions of others and following our moral intuitions. Here, Hegel points out an inconsistency. If the noumenal world is inaccessible to us (as we are creatures with subjective perceptions), how can noumenal realities manifest in the phenomenal world? Since the phenomenal world follows rules of causation, it would be impossible “bridge the gap between the phenomenal and noumenal realms.” For Hegel, such an idea is simply a construct of our minds, and as such, can present no objective reality. 

Hegel’s deconstruction of Kant’s noumenal world challenges the validity of his ethics, which locates moral law and the autonomous will in the objective realm. Because Kant insists that ethics is purely rational, it is difficult to reconcile his theory with Hegel’s criticisms without compromising on this belief. When we are talking about human beings, who are driven by reason and emotion, it seems to be a mistake and mischaracterization to rely solely on reason to explain morality. Thus, post-Kantian philosophers try to accommodate Kant and Hegel’s differences by locating the noumenal realm in the ego, or human consciousness.

Nietzsche also takes issue with Kant’s conception of the noumenal world, arguing that Kant’s reliance on a metaphysical concept in his ethics detracted from the importance of an individual’s desires in shaping morality. For Nietzsche, exploitation is an organic function of all living beings, a natural consequence of the will to power that drives humans to achieve their goals. He believed that the mastery of one’s domain is the ultimate good for humans, not adherence to duty. As such, he fundamentally rejected the idea of universal moral values, opting instead for a subjective brand of morality where individuals cultivate their power to achieve their personal goals (in a sense, this is similar to Aristotle’s virtue ethics, but with a more aggressive underpinning). 

In the Genealogy of Morals, Nietzsche introduces the concept of slave morality to criticize Judeo-Christian norms, pointing out issues in Kant’s philosophy by proxy. He starts with a society where nobles are separated from the rest of society, exalted above the rest by their personal prowess. The rest of society is populated by weak and servile people who cannot climb the social ladder alone, so they band together in an effort to topple the nobles. With priests as the intellectual authority of the new group, they create a social ethic that glorifies prudence and conformity, disguising their inability to think independently with a “slave morality.” Nietzsche argues that Kantian ethics is a similar proponent of slave morality, overemphasizing the importance of duty and keeping individuals from their real potential. 

In a similar vein, Nietzsche believed the Categorical Imperative fails to account for the context surrounding certain moral decisions, overstating its own universality. Recall our previous discussion of the principle of maximin. According to Kant, maximin will always undermine someone unless it involves deception; thus, it cannot be an universal maxim. Now, consider this scenario. Imagine a group of bullies is chasing a little kid across the park. You see the little kid jump into a bush to hide from the bullies. Minutes later, the group approaches you, asking if you saw where the kid went. In this case, it would be rational to lie and tell the group of bullies the kid ran the other way, yet Kant’s ethical theory would argue that this action is not morally good, as it involves deception. As such, it lacks nuance in its discussion of ethical principles, which can be interpreted and applied in a variety of ways across different contexts.

While Nietzsche saw Kant’s moral theory as a denial of human nature, Kant saw his own theory as the opposite. His emphasis on duties and obligations serve to instill compassion in his followers, teaching them to respect the inherent dignity and value of all human beings. Because Kant’s conception of ethical maxims are universal, it prevents “the good” from being reserved for only the powerful, instead offering equal protection to all human beings. Nietzsche was not wrong when he characterized Kantian morality as protecting those with less power in society, but it seems almost tyrannical to deny that such protections typically create a net positive. In comparison to Kantian ethics, Nietzsche’s focus on the will to power takes the good for humans too far in the opposite direction, glorifying individuality to a dangerous degree. 

Thus far, we have discussed Kant’s defense of moral realism and normativity, evaluating his conception of ethics against the criticisms of Hegel and Nietsche. Despite its shortcomings, Kantian ethics acts as a foundational source for deontology, influencing the work of other notable philosophers, such as Korsgaard. At a macro-level, Kant presents a compelling defense for the inherent dignity and autonomy of all rational beings, providing a strong foundation for ethical research concerning interpersonal relationships and the abstract sources of obligation.

{% backmatter %}

## Notes

[^1]: Immanuel Kant, *Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals* (New York: Hackett Publishing, 1993), 81.

{% endbackmatter %}
